About Pet Food Safety - Overview
We all want our dogs and cats to have the best and healthiest food. However, just like our food, pet food and treats can sometimes be contaminated with germs. These germs can make pets and people sick.

About Pet Food Safety - Safe food for dogs and cats
There are many safe food options for your dog or cat. Safe pet foods rarely cause food poisoning in pets. These foods have been cooked or heated to a high enough temperature to kill germs.

About Pet Food Safety - Safe food for dogs and cats
Choose pet foods that provide the right amount of nutrients your pet needs. Look for the words "complete and balanced" on product labels, when buying food for your dog's or cat's main diet.

About Pet Food Safety - Kibbles
Note that some kibbles are coated or mixed with raw pet food. These products would be considered raw pet food and would likely have the word "raw" on the packaging.

About Pet Food Safety - Canned pet foods
Canned pet foods are sealed before being sterilized (heated to a high temperature).

About Pet Food Safety - Fresh pet foods
Fresh pet foods are cooked food with fewer or no preservatives. These products are often delivered to your home as part of online pet food subscription services. They may also be available at pet stores and grocery stores. Because fewer or no preservatives are used, fresh pet foods need to be refrigerated. This also means they do not keep as long as kibbles or canned pet foods.

About Pet Food Safety - Homemade pet foods
Some people make food for their pets using ingredients from the grocery store. Talk to your veterinarian or a veterinary nutritionist If homemade pet foods are your pet's main diet. They will help ensure you are providing a complete and balanced diet for your pet.

About Pet Food Safety - Keep your pets safe
Clean pet food and water bowls, food scoops, treat toys, feeding mats, and placemats frequently.

About Pet Food Safety - Report pet illnesses to FDA
If your pet got sick after eating a specific food, report a complaint to FDA.

About Pet Food Safety - Keep yourself and your family safe
Wash your hands with soap and water before and after handling pet food or treats. Adults should supervise children to ensure they wash their hands properly.

About Pet Food Safety - Keep yourself and your family safe
Don't let your pet lick your open wounds or areas with broken skin. Try not to let your pet lick your mouth or face immediately after they eat.

About Pet Food Safety - Raw pet food
Raw pet food and treats can make your dog or cat sick. This is why CDC does not recommend feeding raw pet food or treats to dogs and cats.

About Pet Food Safety - What is raw pet food?
Raw pet foods contain uncooked animal protein that has not been heated to a high enough temperature to kill germs. This protein typically comes from animals like chicken and beef.

About Pet Food Safety - What is raw pet food?
Plant-based foods, like fruits and vegetables, are less likely to be contaminated with germs. They are not considered raw pet food.

About Pet Food Safety - What is raw pet food?
Some pet food companies use high-energy beams (irradiation) and very high pressure (high pressure processing) to kill germs without heat. However, we currently don't have enough information about how well pet food processing facilities are using these processes. Therefore, these products are still considered to be raw pet food.

About Pet Food Safety - Forms of raw pet food
Even treats and food toppers can be raw. Food toppers are foods that are added to or mixed in with your pet's regular food. Examples of raw treats and food toppers are rawhide chews and freeze-dried treats.

About Pet Food Safety - Identifying raw pet food
The easiest way to identify a raw pet food product is to look for the word "raw" on the packaging. You can also check with the pet store or the pet food company.

About Pet Food Safety - Raw pet food can cause food poisoning
Raw pet food can make your dog or cat sick. This is because raw meat and other raw protein from animals can have germs like Salmonella and Listeria. These germs have been found in several raw pet foods.

About Pet Food Safety - Raw pet food can cause food poisoning
Raw pet food can also make you and your family sick when these germs spread around your kitchen and home.

About Pet Food Safety - Raw pet food can cause food poisoning
Freeze-drying, dehydrating, or freezing raw protein from animals only reduces the amount of germs. These processes do not kill all germs that might be on the food.

About Pet Food Safety - Raw pet food is not necessarily healthier
Raw is not necessarily healthier. Both raw and cooked pet food can be made with high-quality or low-quality ingredients. Both can be nutritionally balanced or inadequate.

About Pet Food Safety - Raw pet food is not necessarily healthier
Both raw and cooked preparations can be digestible. Some nutrients can be more easily digested after the food is cooked while others may be more digestible in raw food. For example, cooking breaks down thiaminase, a harmful enzyme, in seafood and prevents thiamine deficiency in cats.

About Pet Food Safety - Raw pet food is not necessarily healthier
Some people may say raw pet food is the natural, ancestral, or instinctual diet of dogs and cats. However, diets that are optimal for wolves and wild cats are different from pet diets. Dogs and cats that live at home and live longer lives have different dietary needs. In fact, pet dogs prefer and need foods that are lower in protein and higher in fat and carbohydrates than wolves.

About Pet Food Safety - If you're thinking about feeding raw food to your pet
Talk to your veterinarian first if you're thinking about feeding raw pet food to your dog or cat. They can help you decide what is best for your pet and family.

About Pet Food Safety - Pets at risk for serious illness
Do you have a pet that is more likely to get sick from foodborne germs? This includes young pets (like puppies) and pets who have a weakened immune system or other health conditions.

About Pet Food Safety - Balanced diet
Is the raw diet you plan to feed your pet complete and balanced? Will it help your pet thrive?

About Pet Food Safety - Buy from credible companies
Does your company test all your final products for common foodborne germs like Salmonella, E. coli, and Listeria?

About Pet Food Safety - Buy from credible companies
What does your company do to kill germs in your raw pet food products?

About Pet Food Safety - Consult your veterinarian
Talk to your veterinarian or a veterinary nutritionist if raw food is your pet's main diet. They can help you make sure your pet's raw food diet has all the nutrition your pet needs.

About Pet Food Safety - Clean often
Wash your hands with soap and water before and after handling raw pet food. Clean items and surfaces that touched raw pet food.

About Pet Food Safety - Store food properly
Properly chill and store raw pet food that needs to be kept cold. Freeze it until you are ready to thaw and use it. Thaw frozen raw pet food in the refrigerator. Keep it in a sealed container in the freezer and refrigerator, separate from other foods.

About Pet Food Safety - Store food properly
Throw away leftovers that have been out at room temperature.
