Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Overview
However, pets can sometimes carry harmful germs that can make us sick even when the pet appears healthy. The diseases people get from animals are called zoonotic diseases. Below are some tips to help you and your family stay healthy while enjoying pets.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Pick the right pet
Before adopting a new pet, make sure it is the right one for you and your family.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Pick the right pet
Also consider your household members and who will be caring for the pet.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Keep your pet healthy
Regular veterinary visits are essential to keeping your pet and family healthy. Keep up with your pet’s vaccines, deworming, and flea and tick control. Talk to a veterinarian about how to keep your pet healthy.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Keep your pet healthy
By keeping your pet healthy, you help to keep yourself and your family healthy.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Practice good pet hygiene
Practicing good pet hygiene can help prevent the spread of germs between pets and people.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Clean and disinfect
Keep pets and their supplies out of the kitchen. Disinfect pet habitats and supplies outside the house when possible. Never clean supplies in the kitchen sink, food preparation areas, or the bathroom sink.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Pick up after your pet
Dog and cat poop can contain parasites and germs that can be harmful to people. Always remove your dog's feces (poop) from your yard and public places. Use a bag and dispose of it in proper areas.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Pick up after your pet
Keep children away from areas that might contain dog or cat poop to prevent them from getting roundworms and hookworms. Cover sand boxes so cats don't use them as a litter box.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Litter boxes
Clean the cat's litter box daily to lower the chances of exposure to harmful parasites. Pregnant women should avoid changing a cat's litter box if possible.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Teach children how to interact with animals
Pets can teach children compassion and responsibility. However, children younger than 5 years old should be supervised while interacting with animals. This ensures the safety of the child and the pet.

Ways to Stay Healthy Around Animals - Teach children how to interact with animals
Teach children to wash their hands right after playing with animals or anything in the animals' environment. This includes cages, beds, and food or water dishes. Don't let children kiss pets or put their hands or other objects in their mouths after handling animals.
