Chlamydia felis
Chlamydia felis is a Gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen that infects cats. It is endemic among domestic cats worldwide, primarily causing inflammation of feline conjunctiva, rhinitis and respiratory problems. C. felis can be recovered from the stomach and reproductive tract. Zoonotic infection of humans with C. felis has been reported. Strains FP Pring and FP Cello have an extrachromosomal plasmid, whereas the FP Baker strain does not. FP Cello produces lethal disease in mice, whereas the FP Baker does not. An attenuated FP Baker strain, and an attenuated 905 strain, are used as live vaccines for cats.

Chlamydia felis - Disease
Infected cats typically contract conjunctivitis within a 2-5 day incubation period. Clinical signs of infection are hyperaemia of the nictitating membrane (severity varies), blepharospasm, and discharge from the eye. The infection is not deadly, but if left untreated may cause blindness and pain for the cat. Infection is commonly spread among cats by ocular secretion. C. felis infection is most common in multicat environments such as shelters, breeder catteries, and among stray cat communities. Young cats, around the age of one year or under, are at the highest risk of infection. Infection can be detected either by culturing a sample or by PCR. Ocular samples are the most common, but samples can also be oropharyngeal, nasal, and/or oral. The infection can be treated with antibiotics, typically with tetracyclines. Vaccines for C. felis, both attenuated and inactivated, are available for cats. For immunocompromised cats it is recommended that they only receive the inactivated vaccine, and only if necessary.

Chlamydia felis - Zoonotic potential
C. felis typically has low zoonotic potential, which is the likelihood that a pathogen can be spread from animal to human and still cause disease. People who own or handle cats regularly are at a higher risk of contracting an infection from an afflicted cat. The risk is even higher if the individual is immunocompromised or if there is poor hygiene. In humans, C. felis could cause conjunctivitis, various respiratory problems, and other diseases. Since most human cases are asymptomatic, it is possible that this zoonosis occurs more often than we know.

Chlamydia felis - Cat health
C. felis is a common cause of conjunctivitis and upper respiratory problems in cats. If left untreated, it leads to damage in the eyes followed by a loss of vision and, eventually, blindness. While this is not fatal, it is still very uncomfortable for the cat. Many countries do have a vaccine available.

Chlamydia felis - Adoption
Up to 95% of cats with this infection come from shelters that have poor hygiene practices. The presence of other animals, like in an animal shelter, increases prevalence. This could have an impact on the adoption rates of animals in infected shelters. People generally prefer cats that appear happy, healthy, and playful. However, some cats are adopted out of pity.
